Prevention of Electronic Crimes Act, 2016
=========================================

THE PREVENTION OF ELECTRONIC CRIMES ACT, 2016

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

Section 2H. Chairperson and members not to engage themselves in certain business, etc.

Section 2J. Officers, etc. deemed to be public servants

Section 2S. Handling of complaints by social media platforms

Section 26A. Punishment for false and fake information

Section 1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the
Prevention of Electronic Crimes Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of Pakistan.
(3) It shall apply to every citizen of Pakistan wherever he may be and also to every other person
for the time being in Pakistan.
(4) It shall also apply to any act committed outside Pakistan by any person if the act constitutes
an offence under this Act and affects a person, property, information system or data located in Pakistan.
(5) It shall come into force at once.

Section 2. Definitions.— (1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
(i) "act" includes—
(a) a series of acts or omissions contrary to the provisions of this Act; or
(b) causing an act to be don e by a person either directly or through an
automated information system or automated mechanism or
self-executing, adaptive or autonomous device and whether having
temporary or permanent impact;
(ii) "access to data" means gaining control or ability to use, copy, modify or delete
any data held in or generated by any device or information system;
(iii) "access to information system" means gaining control or ability to use any part
or whole of an information system whether or not through infringing any
security measure;
1[(iiia) "aspersion" means spreading false and harmful information which damages the
reputation of a person;]

1Ins. by Act No. II of 2025, s.2.

1[(iv) "Authority" means the Social Media Protection and Regulatory Authority
established under section 2A]
(v) "authorization" means authorization by law or by the person empowered to
make such authorization under the law:
Provided that where an information system or data is available for open
access by the general public, access to or transmission of such information
system or data shall be deemed to be authorized for the purposes of this Act;
(vi) "authorized officer" means an officer of the investigation agency authorized to
perform any function on behalf of the investigation agency by or under this Act;
1[(via) "complainant" means any person who makes complaint of any offence under
this Act and includes a victim, or an individual having substantial reasons to
believe that the offence has been committed;"
"(vib) "inquiry" includes every inquiry conducted by an investigation agency on a
complaint made in writing;]
(vii) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) ;
2[(viia) "complainant" means any person who makes complaints of any offence under
this Act and includes a victim, or an individual having substantial reasons to
believe the offence is being committed or likely to be committed and any
authority referring the complaint for investigation;]
(viii) "content data " means any representatio n of fact, information or concept for
processing in an information system including source code or a program suitable
to cause an information system to perform a function;
(ix) "Court" means the Court of competent jurisdiction designated under this Act;
(x) "critical infrastructure" means critical elements of infrastructure namely assets,
facilities, systems, networks or processes the loss or compromise of which could
result in,—
(a) major detrimental impact on the availability, integrity or delivery of
essential services including those services, whose integrity, if
compromised, could result in significant loss of life or casualties, taking
into account significant economic or social impacts; or
(b) significant impact on national security, national def ense, or the
functioning of the state:
Provided that the Government may designate any private or
Government infrastructure in accordance with the objectives of
sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) above, as critical infrastructure as may be
prescribed under this Act;

1Subs. by Act No. II of 2025, s.2.
2Ins. by Act No. XXXVII of 2023, s.2.

(xi) "critical infrastructure information system or data" means an information
system, program or data that supports or performs a function with respect to a
critical infrastructure;
(xii) "damage to an information system " means any unauthorized change in the
ordinary working of an information system that impairs its performance, access,
output or change in location whether temporary or permanent and with or
without causing any change in the system;
(xiii) "data" includes content data and traffic data;
(xiv) "data damage " means alteration, deletion, deterioration, erasure, relocation,
suppression of data or making data temporarily or permanently unavailable;
(xv) "device" includes,—
(a) physical device or article;
(b) any electronic or virtual tool that is not in physical form;
(c) a password, access code or similar data, in electronic or other form, by
which the whole or any part of an information system is capable of being
accessed; or
(d) automated, self-executing, adaptive or autonomous devices, programs or
information systems;
(xvi) "dishonest intention " means intention to cause injury, wrongful gain or
wrongful loss or harm to any person or to create hatred or incitement to violence;
(xvii) "electronic" includes electrical, digital, magnetic, optical, biometric,
electrochemical, electromechanical, wireless or electromagnetic technology;
(xviii) "identity information" means an information which may authenticate or identify
an individual or an information system and enable access to any data or
information system;
(xix) "information" includes text, message, data, voice, sound, database, video,
signals, software, computer programmes, any forms of intelligence as defined
under the Pakistan Telecommunication (Reorganization) Act, 1996 (XVII of
1996) and codes including object code and source code;
(xx) "information system " means an electronic system for creating, generating,
sending, receiving, storing, reproducing, displaying, recording or processing
any information;
(xxi) "integrity" means, in relation to an electronic document, electronic signature
or advanced electronic signature, the electronic document, electronic
signature or advanced electronic signature that has not been tampered with,
altered or modified since a particular point in time;

(xxii) "interference with information system or data " means and includes an
unauthorized act in relation to an information system or data that may disturb
its normal working or form with or without causing any actual damage to such
system or data;
(xxiii) "investigation agency" means the law enforcement agency established by or
designated under this Act;
(xxiv) "minor" means, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, any
person who has not completed the age of eighteen years;
(xxv) "offence" means an offence punishable under this Act except when committed
by a person under ten years of age or by a person abo ve ten years of age and
under fourteen years of age, who has not attained sufficient maturity of
understanding to judge the nature and consequences of his conduct on that
occasion;
1[(xxva) "Unlawful or offensive content" means the offence as defined in section 2R;
(xxvb) "person" means a legal or natural person and includes a body politic or
corporate;
(xxvb) "prescribed" means rules or regulations made under this Act;]
(xxvi) "rules" means rules made under this Act;
(xxvii) "seize" with respect to an in formation system or data includes taking
possession of such system or data or making and retaining a copy of the data;
2[(xxviia) "sexually explicit conduct " means actual or simulated -sexual intercourse,
including genital -genital, oral -genital, ana l-genital, or oral -anal, whether
between persons of the same or opposite sex; or
(a) bestiality; or
(b) masturbation; or
(c) sadistic or masochistic abuse; or
(d) lascivious exhibition of the anus, genitals, or pubic area of any person;]
(xxviii) "service provider" includes a person who,—
(a) acts as a service provider in relation to sending, receiving, storing, processing
or distribution of any electronic communication or the provision of other
services in relation to electronic communication through an information
system;
(b) owns, possesses, operates, manages or controls a public switched network or
provides telecommunication services; or

1Ins. by Act No. II of 2025, s.2.
2Ins. by Act No. XXXVII of 2023, s.2.

(c) processes or stores data on behalf of such electronic communication service or
users of such service;
1[(xxviiia) "sexual abuse of a minor" shall have the same meaning given to "sexual abuse"
in section 377A of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860);]
2[(xxviiib) "social media platform" means—
(a) any person that owns, provides or manages online information
system for provision of social media or social network service; or
(b) a website, application or mobile web application, platform or
communication channel and any other such application and service
that permits a person to become a registered user, establish an
account, or create a public profile for the primary purpose of
allowing the user to post or share user -generated content through
such an account or profile or enables one or more users to generate
content that can be viewed, posted or shared by other users of such
platform but shall not include the licensees of Pakistan
Telecommunication Authority;]
(xxix) "subscriber information" means any information held in any form by a service
provider relating to a subscriber other than traffic data;
(xxx) "traffic data" includes data relating to a communication indicating its origin,
destination, route, time, size, duration or type of service;
3[(xxxa) "Tribunal" means the Telecommunication Appellate Tribunal established
under section 7A of the Pakistan Telecommunication (re-organization) Act,
1996 (XVII of 1996) as amended through the Establishment of
Telecommunication Appellate Tribunal Act, 2024 (XXV of 2024).]
2[(xxxa) "Tribunal" means the Social Media Protection Tribunal established under
Chapter 1C;]
(xxxi) "unauthorized access" means access to an information system or data which is
not available for access by general public, without authorization or in violation
of the terms and conditions of the authorization;
(xxxii) "unauthorized interception" shall mean in relation to an information system or
data, any interception without authorization; and
(xxxiii) "unsolicited information" means the information which is sent for commercial
and marketing purposes against explicit rejection of the recipient and does not
include marketing authorized under the law.
(2) Unless the context provides otherwise, any other expression used in this Ac t or rules made
thereunder but not defined in this Act, shall have the same meanings assigned to the expressions in the
Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860), the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) and
the Qanoon-e-Shahadat, 1984 (P.O.No.X of 1984), as the case may be.
1Ins. by XXXVII of 2023, s. 2.
2Ins. by Act No. II of 2025, s.2.
3Ins. by Act No. XXV of 2024, s.6.

1[CHAPTER-1A
AUTHORITY

Section 2A. Establishment of the Authority.— (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of the
Prevention of Electronic Crimes (Amendment) Act, 2025 ( of 2025), the Federal Government shall,
by notification in the official Gazette, establish an Authority to be known as the Social Media
Protection and Regulatory Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal
and may sue and be sued in its own name with powers subject to and for the purposes of this A ct to
hold and dispose of property and to enter into contract.
(3) The principal office of the Authority shall be at Islamabad and it may set up other offices
in the provincial capitals and at such other places across Pakistan as the Authority may deem
appropriate.

Section 2B. Powers and functions of the Authority .— (1) In addition to the functions and powers
specified otherwise in this Act, the Authority shall have the following powers and functions, namely:—
(a) promote education and research in the related field;
(b) promote, incentivize and facilitate social media platform;
(c) promote awareness about issues in the public and private sector through print,
digital or social and electronic media etc., or any other medium as the Authority
may deem appropriate;
(d) ensure online safety and rights of persons on social media platforms from any
kind of harm;
(e) regulate the unlawful or offensive content on the social media platforms
accessible from Pakistan;
(f) regulate enlistment of social media platforms;
(g) grant, renew, refuse, suspend and revoke enlistment of social media platform;
(h) to partially or fully block social media platform if it fails to comply with the
provisions under this Act until the compliance is made;
(i) issue guidelines, directives and standards for social media platforms;
(j) proceed on applications made on any contravention under this Act and take
actions accordingly;
(k) prescribe fines for contravention of the provisions of Chapters 1A and 1B or
rules or regulations made thereunder;

1Ins. by Act No. II of 2025, s.3.

(l) issue directions to the relevant authorities to block or remove the unlawful or
offensive content for the reasons to be recorded in writing for a period of thirty
days subject to grant of another extension if any fo r maximum period of thirty
days by majority of all the members of the Authority;
(m) coordinate or engage with other authorities, international agencies or
organizations, in any study, training or cooperation project related to online
safety;
(n) enter into contracts as may be necessary for the discharge of any of its powers
and functions;
(o) engage in human resource development and training of its officers and staff;
(p) liaise and interact with counterpart organizations in other countries for capacity
building and exchange of information;
(q) carry out capacity building and training of relevant entrepreneurs and providing
them with facilities, including but not limited to, setting up incubation centers
to promote responsible social media platforms;
(r) coordinate the implementation of any foreign -aided technical assistance
projects;
(s) make regulations for receiving or processing complaints and to provide a
remedial mechanism;
(t) to initiate action on any contravention of the provisions of this Act or rules made
thereunder on its own motion or on receipt of an application as the case may be;
(u) constitute such committees or sub -committees, for the performance of its
functions, as it may deem appropriate; and
(v) perform any other function that is ancillary, incidental or consequential to any
of the aforesaid functions.

Section 2C. Complaint to the Authority on fake information .— Any person aggrieved by fake and
false information may apply to the Authority for removal or blocking access to such information and
the Authority shall, on receipt of such application, forthwith, but not later than twenty-four hours, pass
such orders as it considers necessary including an order for removal or blocking access to such
information,

Section 2D. Composition of the A uthority.— (1) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and
eight other members out of which Secretary Ministry of Interior, Chairman PEMRA and Chairman
Pakistan Telecommunication Authority (PTA) or any member of PTA nominated by him shall be the
ex-officio members.
(2) The Chairperson and five members, other than ex-officio members, shall be appointed by
the Federal Government on such terms and conditions as may be determined by it. The Chairperson
shall be eminent professional with recognized bachelor's degree and with fifteen years' experience in
information technology or law or social media policy governance or related emerging technologies.

(3) The Chairperson and members, other than ex-officio members, shall be appointed for a non-
extendable period of five years/provided the Chairperson or a member does not exceed fifty-eight years
of age on the date of his initial appointment.
(4) The following shall qualifications of members, other than ex-officio Members, namely:—
(a) a journalist registered with any press club of Pakistan, having not less than ten
years of experience, with known professional competence in his field, and
minimum qualifications of a bachelor's degree in -humanities or journalism,
recognized by the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan;
(b) a software engineer with a minimum qualification of a bachelor's degree in
software engineering or an allied subject recognized by the Higher Education
Commission of Pakistan having not less than ten years of experience;
(c) an adv ocate with a minimum qualification of a bachelor's degree in law
recognized by the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan having not less
than ten years of experience as practicing advocate;
(d) a social media professional with a minimum qualification of a bachelor's degree
in an associated subject recognized by the Higher Education Commission of
Pakistan, with ten years of experience in the online and civil rights space; and
(e) a private sector IT entrepreneur with minimum qualification of a bachelor's
degree recognized by the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan and having
not less than ten years of field experience.
(5) The Authority may delegate all or any of its functions and powers, other than the functions
and powers under Chapter 1B, to the Chairperson or any member or such other officers of the Authority
by notification in the official gazette subject to such conditions as it may deem appropriate.
(6) The powers of the Authority in the matters relating to its administration and human
resources shall be exercised by the Chairperson in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2E) Removal of Chairperson and members.— (1) The Federal Government may remove the
Chairperson or a member, other than ex -officio members, from his office if he is found unable to
perform the functions of his office due to mental or physical disability, inefficiency or to have
committed misconduct.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression "misconduct" means conviction
for any abuse or misuse of authority.
(2) In case of a vacancy occurring due to the death, resignation, retirement or removal of
Chairperson or any member, other than the ex-officio members, the Federal Government shall appoint
another qualified person within a period not exceeding three month s from the date the vacancy
occurred.
(3) The Federal Government may appoint an acting Chairperson out of the existing members
other than ex-officio members for a maximum period of three months, to perform day to day functions.
(2F) Meetings of the Authority, etc .— (1) The Chairperson, or in his absence the member
elected by the members present in the meeting, shall preside a meeting of the Authority.

(2) Five members, including at least two ex-officio members and the Chairperson, s hall
constitute a quorum for meetings of the Authority.
Explanation.— In case of absence of Chairperson, members may elect one member as
Chairperson to preside the meeting.
(3) The members shall have the right to receive at least seven days in .advance notice containing
time, date and place of the meeting and the agenda of meeting on which decision by the Authority shall
be taken.
(4) The decisions of the Authority shall be taken by majority of its members present, and in
case of a tie, the Chairperson sha ll have a casting vote. The presence of members for the purposes of
quorum shall be deemed to be adequate if the meeting is carried out through social media platforms.
(5) All orders, determinations and directions of the Authority shall be taken in writing and shall
identify the orders, determinations and directions of the Chairperson and members separately.
(6) No act or proceedings of the Authority shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of a
vacancy in or defect in the constitution of the Authority.
(2G) Powers and functions of the Chairperson.— (1) The Chairperson shall also function as
the chief executive of the Authority and shall perform such functions and exercise such powers as may
be delegated by the Authority.
(2) The Chairperson shall have exclusive powers to perform such functions and exercise such
powers which require immediate action including issuance of direction for blocking of any unlawful
online content:
Provided that any such exercise of power or performance of function shall be subject to
ratification by the Authority within forty-eight hours:
Provided further that such notification can be done by circulation.
(2H) Chairperson and members not to engage themselves in certain business, etc.— (l) The
Chairperson or any member, shall not, during the term of office, engage himself in any other service,
business, vocation or employment, or enter into the employment of, or accept any advisory or
consultancy relationship with any person or entity engaged in applying for the r egistration from the
Authority or operating any media related business within the purview of the Authority or in providing
services or products to the Authority on any of the projects, schemes, proposals or plans undertaken,
executed or supervised by the Authority or any related undertaking of such aforesaid person or entity.
The Chairperson or any member shall not have any direct or indirect financial interest or any
connection which might reasonably be viewed as giving rise to a conflict of interest with any person,
entity or related undertaking involved in any regulated activity under this Act.
(2) The Chairperson or any member, other than ex-officio members, shall neither, for so long
as he holds office and for a period of one year thereafter, seek or ho ld any office or employment nor
acquire or purchase whether in his name or otherwise any interest in any company, corporation,
partnership, trust, firm or company carrying on business in any regulated activity or the business of
providing consultancy or advisory services to any person undertaking any regulated activity under this
Act.

(2I) Officers, employees, etc.— To carry out the purposes of this Act, the Authority may, from
time to time, appoint experts, consultants, advisers and other officers and emp loyees on such terms
and conditions as may be prescribed and the share of Provinces in the appointment shall be maintained
in accordance with paragraph (g) of Article 38 of the Constitution.
(2J) Officers, etc. deemed to be public servants.— The Chairperson, members, other officers
and employees of the Authority shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section
21 of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860).
(2K) Fund.— (1) There shall be established a fund to be known as Social Media Protection and
Regulatory Authority Fund which shall vest in the Authority and shall be utilized by the Authority to
meet its financial needs in connection with carrying out its functions, including expenses incurred in
setting up and maintaining offices, p urchasing and maintaining, equipment, payment of salaries and
other remunerations to the Chairperson, members, employees, experts and consultants of the Authority
and any other expenditures that may be incurred in carrying out the purposes of this Act and matters
incidental thereto.
(2) The Fund shall consist of—
(a) seed money and grant from the Federal Government;
(b) any fee prescribed by the Authority;
(c) loans obtained with special or general sanction of the Government; and
(d) all other sums and additional fees received by the Authority and revenue
received from any other source.
(3) The Authority may open and operate one or more accounts in local or foreign currency, in
any scheduled bank in Pakistan.
(4) The Authority, may invest its funds in such investments as it may, from time to time,
determine, except fund provided by the Government.

Section 2L. Budget.— The Authority shall, in respect of each financial year, prepare its own budget and
submit it to the Government through its administrative division and the finance division three months
before the commencement of every financial year for approval.

Section 2M. Accounts and audit.— (1) The Authority shall maintain complete and accurate books of
accounts of its actual expenses and receipts in such form as ma y be prescribed in accordance with
Articles 169 and 170 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
(2) The Authority shall cause, to be carried out audit of its accounts by one or more auditors
who are chartered accountants within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1961 (X of 1961).
(3) Notwithstanding the audit specified, in sub-section (2) the Auditor-General of Pakistan shall
have the power to audit or cause to be audited the accounts of the Authority.

Section 2N. Annual report .— The Au thority shall compile and submit an annual report on its
operations and accounts for each financial year to both houses of the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) and
shall also arrange for its publication and circulation to the media and the public.

Section 2O. Power of the Federal Government to Issue directives.— The Federal Government may,
as and when it considers necessary, issue directives to the Authority on matters of policy relating to
this Act, and such directives shall be binding on the Authority, and if a ques tion arises as to whether
any matter is a matter of policy or not, the decision of the Federal Government shall be final.

Section 2P. Indemnity.— No suit, prosecution or either proceedings shall lie against the Government
or public authority or functionary or any other person exercising any powers or performing any
function under this Act or for anything done in good faith.
CHAPTER-IB
ENLISTMENT ETC

Section 2Q. Enlistment.— (1) The Authority may require any social media platform to enlist with it in
such manner, form and on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.
(2) The Authority may stipulate, in addition to the requirements of this Act, such conditions or
requisites as it may deem appropriate while enlisting a social media platform.

Section 2R. Unlawful or offensive online content.— (1) The Authority shall have the power to issue
directions to a social media platform for removal or blocking of online content, if such online content—
(a) is against the ideology of Pakistan, etc.;
(b) incites the public to violate the law, take the law in own hands, with a view to
coerce, intimidate or terrorize public, individuals, groups, communities,
government officials and institutions;
(c) incites public or section of public to cause damage to governmental or private
property;
(d) coerce or intimidate public or section of public and thereby preventing them
from carrying on their lawful trade and disrupts civic life;
(e) incites hatred and contempt on religious, sectarian or ethnic basis to stir up
violence or cause internal disturbance;
(f) contains anything obscene or pornographic in contravention of any applicable
law;
(g) is known to be fake, or false or there exist sufficient reasons to believe that the
same may he fake or false beyond a reasonable doubt;
(h) contains aspersions against any person including members of Judiciary; Armed
Forces, Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) or a Provincial Assembly; or
(i) promotes and encourages terrorism and other forms of violence against the State
or its institutions.
(2) Without prejudice to any other restrictions in this regard, while reporting the proceedings
of the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) or a Provincial Assembly, such portion of the proceedings as the
Chairman of the Senate, the Speaker of the National Assembly or, as the case may be, Speaker of the

Provincial Assembly may have ordered to be expunged, shall not be streamed or made available for
viewing on social media platforms in any manner and every effort shall be made to release a fair
account of the proceedings.
(3) The statements of prescribed organizations or their representatives or members thereof shall
not be streamed or made available for viewing on social media platforms in any manner.
(2S) Handling of complaints by social media platforms .— The social media platforms shall
maintain an effective and transparent procedure for handling complaints about unlawful or offensive
online content. The social media platforms shall supply users with any easily recognizable, directly
accessible, and permanently available procedure for submitting complaints about unlawful or offensive
online content.
(2T) Social Media Complaint Council,— (1) The Federal Government shall by notification in
the official Gazette, constitute Social Media Complaint Council which shall consist of a Chairman and
four members including one ex-officio member to receive and process complaints made by persons,
organizations and general public against violation of any provision of this Act as may be prescribed by
regulations.
(2) The Chairman and membe rs other than ex-officio members of the Council shall be
appointed by the Federal Government for a term of three years extendable for another similar term on
the terms and conditions of service as may be determined by it.
(3) The Chairman and members other than ex-officio member of the Council, shall not exceed
sixty-two years of age at the time of their initial appointment.
(4) The Chairman and members of the Council shall be eminent professional having a
recognized bachelor's degree and with fifteen yea rs experience in information technology or law or
social media policy governance or related emerging technologies.
(5) Secretary or Additional Secretary of the division to which business of information
technology and telecommunication stands allocated shall be the ex-officio member of the Council.
(6) The Chairman or a member of the Council may resign from his office by writing under his
hand addressed to the Federal Government through the division concerned.
(7) The Federal Government may remove the Chairman or a member of the Council if he is
found unable to perform the functions of his office due to mental or physical disability, inefficiency or
to have committed misconduct.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression "misconduct" means conviction
for any offence involving moral turpitude and abuse or misuse of authority.
(8) In case of a vacancy occurring due to the death, resignation or removal of Chairman or any
member of the Council, other than the ex-officio member, the Feder al Government shall appoint
another qualified person within a. period not exceeding two months from the date the vacancy
occurred.

Section 2U. Violation or non -implementation.— In case of any violation or non -implementation of
any directions of the Authority by a social media platform, the Authority may approach the Tribunal
for appropriate action.

CHAPTER IC
SOCIAL MEDIA PROTECTION TRIBUNAL

Section 2V. Tribunals.— (1) The Federal Government may, by notification in the official gazette,
establish as many Social Media Protection Tribunals for the purposes of this Act as it may determine.
Where more than one such Tribunals are established, the Federal Government shall specify territorial
limits within which or the class of cases in respect of which each of such Tri bunal shall exercise
jurisdiction under this Act.
(2) A Tribunal shall consist of—
(a) a Chairman, who has been or is qualified to be a judge of a High Court;
(b) a journalist registered with any press club of Pakistan having not less than
twelve years of relevant experience with known professional competence in his
field and having a bachelor's degree in journalism recognized by the Higher
Education Commission of Pakistan; and
(c) a software engineer, and expert in the field of social media rights haying a
minimum of bachelor's degree recognized by the Higher Education
Commission, of Pakistan, in relevant field or allied subject.
(3) The Chairman and members of a Tribunal shall be appointed by the Federal Government
for a period of three years, on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
(4) The Chairman or a member of a Tribunal may resign from his office by writing under his
hand addressed to the Federal Government through the division to which business of law stands
allocated.
(5) The Federal Government may remove the Chairman or a member of the Tribunal if he is
found unable to perform the functions of his office due to mental or physical disability, inefficiency or
to have committed misconduct.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression "misconduct" means conviction
for any offence involving moral turpitude and abuse or misuse of authority.
(6) In case of a vacancy occurring due to the death, resignation, completion of his term of
appointment or removal of Chairman or any memb er of the Tribunal, the Federal Government shall
appoint another qualified person within a period not exceeding one month from the date, the vacancy
occurred.
(7) The Tribunal shall decide all cases within ninety days. In case the decision is not rendered
within the stipulated time, the Tribunal shall record the reasons for the same.
(8) The Tribunal shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.
(2W) Jurisdiction of the Tribunal.— (1) The Tribunal shall exercise such powers and perform
such functions as are or may be conferred upon or assigned to it by or under this Act or rules made
thereunder.

(2) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Authority may prefer an appeal before the
Tribunal in such manner as may be prescribed.

Section 2X. Appeal against decisions of the Tribunal.—Any person aggrieved by the final decision
of the Tribunal may prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court of Pakistan within sixty days of receipt of
the decision.]
CHAPTER II
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENTS

Section 3. Unauthorized access to information system or data.— Whoever with dishonest intention
gains unauthorized access to any information system or data shall be punished with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend t o fifty thousand rupees or
with both.

Section 4. Unauthorized copying or transmission of data.— Whoever with dishonest intention and
without authorization copies or otherwise transmits or causes to be transmitted any data shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to one hundred thousand rupees or with both.

Section 5. Interference with information system or data. —Whoever with dishonest intention
interferes with or damages or causes to be interfered with or damages any part or whole of an
information system or data shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to two years or
with fine which may extend to five hundred thousand rupees or with both.

Section 6. Unauthorized access to critical infrastructure information system or data.— Whoever
with dishonest intention gains unauthorized access to any critical infrastructure information system
or data shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine which may
extend to one million rupees or with both.

Section 7. Unauthorized copying or transmission of critical infrastructure data.— Whoever with
dishonest intention and without authorization copies or otherwise transmits or causes to be transmitted
any critical infrastructure data shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
five years, or with fine which may extend to five million rupees or with both.

Section 8. Interference with critical infrastructure information system or data. — Whoever with
dishonest intention interferes with or damages, or causes to be interfered with or damaged, any part or
whole of a critical information system, or data, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend
to seven years or with fine which may extend to ten million rupees or with both.

Section 9. Glorification of an offence.— (1) Whoever prepares or disseminates information, through
any information system or device, with the intent to glorify an offence relating to terrorism, or any
person convicted of a crime relating to terrorism, or activities of proscribed organizations or individuals
or groups shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or with
fine which may extend to ten million rupees or with both.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "glorification" includes depiction of any form
of praise or celebration in a desirable manner.

Section 10. Cyber terrorism.— Whoever commits or threatens to commit any of the offences under
sections 6, 7, 8 or 9, where the commission or threat is with the intent to,—

(a) coerce, intimidate, create a sense of fear, panic or insecurity in the Government
or the public or a section of the public or community or sect or create a sense of
fear or insecurity in society; or
(b) advance inter-faith, sectarian or ethnic hatred; or
(c) advance the objectives of organizations or individuals or groups proscribed
under the law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to fourteen years or with fine which may extend to fifty
million rupees or with both.

Section 11. Hate speech.— Whoever prepares or disseminates information, through any information
system or device, that advances or is likely to advance interfaith, sectarian or racial hatred, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or with fine or with both.

Section 12. Recruitment, funding and planning of terrorism. — Whoever prepares or disseminates
information, through any information system or device, that invites or motivates to fund, or recruits
people for terrorism or plans for terrorism shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years or with fine or with both.

Section 13. Electronic forgery.— (1) Whoever interferes with or uses any information system, device
or data, with the intent to cause damage or injury to the public or to any person, or to make any illegal
claim or title or to cause any person to part with property or to enter into any express or implied
contract, or with intent to commit fraud by any input , alteration, deletion, or suppression of data,
resulting in unauthentic data with the intent that it be considered or acted upon for legal purposes as if
it were authentic, regardless of the fact that the data is directly readable and intelligible or not, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty thousand rupees or with both.
(2) Whoever commits offence under sub-section (1) in relation to a critical infrastructure
information system or data shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years or with fine which may extend to five million rupees or with both.

Section 14. Electronic fraud.—Whoever with the intent for wrongful gain interferes with or uses any
information system, device or data or induces any person to enter into a relationship or deceives any
person, which act or omission is likely to cause damage or harm to that person or any other person
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may
extend to ten million rupees or with both.

Section 15. Making, obtaining, or supplying device for use in offence. —Whoever produces, makes,
generates, adapts, exports, supplies, offers to supply or imports for use any information system, data
or device, with the intent to be used or believing that it is primarily to be used to commit or to assist in
the commission of an offence under this Act shall, without prejudice to any other liability that he may
incur in this behalf, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both.

Section 16. Unauthorized use of identity information. — (1) Whoever obtains, sells, p ossesses,
transmits or uses another person' s identity information without authorization shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to five million
rupees, or with both.

(2) Any person whos e identity information is obtained, sold, possessed, used or transmitted
may apply to the Authority for securing, destroying, blocking access or preventing transmission of
identity information referred to in sub-section (1) and the Authority on receipt of such application may
take such measures as deemed appropriate for securing, destroying or preventing transmission of such
identity information.

Section 17. Unauthorized issuance of SIM cards etc. —Whoever sells or otherwise provides
subscriber identity module (SIM ) card, re-usable identification module (R-IUM) or universal
integrated circuit card (UICC) or other module designed for authenticating users to establish
connection with the network and to be used in cellular mobile, wireless phone or other digital devices
such as tablets, without obtaining and verification of the subscriber' s antecedents in the mode and
manner for the time being approved by the 1[Pakistan Telecommunication Authority] shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to five
hundred thousand rupees or with both.

Section 18. Tampering, etc. of communication equipment. —Whoever unlawfully or without
authorization changes, alters, tampers with or re-programs unique device identifier of any
communication equipment including a cellular or wireless handset and starts using or marketing such
device for transmitting and receiving information shall be punished with imprisonment which may
extend to three years or with fine which may extend to one million rupees or with both.
Explanation.— A "unique device identifier" is an electronic equipment identifier which is
unique to a communication device.

Section 19. Unauthorized interception.— Whoever with dishonest intention commits unauthorized
interception by technical means of—
(a) any transmission that is not intended to be and is not open to the public, from or
within an information system; or
(b) electromagnetic emissions from an infor mation system that are carrying data,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years or with fine which may extend to five hundred thousand
rupees or with both.

Section 20. Offences against dignity of a natural p erson.— (1) Whoever intentionally and publicly
exhibits or displays or transmits any information through any information system, which he knows to
be false, and intimidates or harms the reputation or privacy of a natural person, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to one million
rupees or with both:
Provided that nothing under this sub-section shall apply to anything aired by a broadcast media
or distribution service licensed under the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority Ordinance,
2002 (XIII of 2002).
(2) Any aggrieved person or his guardian, where such person is a minor, may apply to the
Authority for removal, destruction of or blocking access to such information referred to in sub-section

1Subs. by Act No. II of 2025, s.4.

(1) and the Authority on receipt of such application, shall forthwith pass such orders as deemed
reasonable in the circumstances including an order for removal, destruction, preventing transmission
of or blocking access to such information and the Authority may also direct any of its licensees to
secure such information including traffic data.

Section 21. Offences against modesty of a natural person and minor. —(1) Whoever intentionally
and publicly exhibits or displays or transmits any information which,—
(a) superimposes a photograph of the face of a natural person over any sexually
explicit image or video; or
(b) includes a photograph or a video of a natural person in sexually explicit conduct;
or
(c) intimidates a natural person with any sexual act, or any sexually explicit image
or video of a natural person; or
(d) cultivates, entices or induces a natural person to engage in a sexually explicit
act,
through an information s ystem to harm a natural person or his reputation, or to take revenge, or to
create hatred or to blackmail, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
five years or with fine which may extend to five million rupees or with both.
(2) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (1) with respect to a minor shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine which may
extend to five million rupees:
Provided that in case of a person who has been pr eviously convicted of an offence under sub-
section (1) with respect to a minor shall be punished with imprisonment for a term of ten years and
with fine.
(3) Any aggrieved person or his guardian, where such person is a minor, may apply to the
Authority for removal, destruction of or blocking access to such information referred to in sub-section
(1) and the Authority, on receipt of such application, shall forthwith pass such orders as deemed
reasonable in the circumstances including an order for removal, de struction, preventing transmission
of or blocking access to such information and the Authority may also direct any of its licensees to
secure such information including traffic data.

Section 22. Child pornography.— (1) Whoever intentionally produces, offers or ma kes available,
distributes or transmits through an information system or procures for himself or for another person or
without lawful justification possesses material in an information system, that visually depicts—
(a) a minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct;
(b) a person appearing to be a minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct; or
(c) realistic images representing a minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct; or
(d) discloses the identity of the minor,

shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 1[fourteen years and may extend
up to twenty years and with fine which shall not be less than one million rupees].
(2) Any aggrieved person or his guardian, where such person is a minor, may apply to the
Authority for removal, destruction of or blocking access to such information referred to in sub-section
(1) and the Authority, on receipt of such application, shall forthwith pass such orders as deemed
reasonable in the circumstances, including an order for removal, des truction, preventing transmission
of or blocking access to such information and the Authority may also direct any of its licensees to
secure such information including traffic data.

Section 22A. Online grooming, solicitation and cyber enticement.— Whoever intentionally creates
or takes steps towards creating a relationship of trust with a minor through the use of an information
system or device or any other similar means of communication with the intent to facilitate, solicit or
commit sexual abuse of a minor or to share, facilitate or solicit sexual content or produce sexual abuse
material with a minor, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years and not less than five years with fine which may extend to ten million rupees but
not less than five hundred thousand rupees.

Section 22B. Commercial sexual exploitation of children.—Subject to section 8, whoever is directly
or indirectly involved in the use of an information system or other similar means f or the purposes of
the sexual exploitation of minors including child prostitution and child se x tourism by payment in
money or in kind to the minor or any other person shall be punished with i mprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not b e less than fourteen years and may extend up to twenty years
and with fine which shall not be less than one million rupees.

Section 22C. Use of information system for kidnapping, abduction or trafficking of minor. —
Whoever contacts a minor through the use of an information system or any other similar means directly
or indirectly of communication with intent to kidnap, abduct or traffic a minor to commit sexual abuse
of a minor or exploitation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than fourteen years and may extend up to twenty years and with fine which shall not
be less than one million rupees.]

Section 23. Malicious code. —Whoever willfully and without authorization writes, offers, makes
available, distributes or transmits malicious code through an information system or device, with intent
to cause harm to any information system or data resulting in the corruption, destruction, alteration,
suppression, theft or loss of the information system or data shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one million rupees or with both.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression "malicious code" includes,
a computer program or a hidden function in a program that damages an information system or
data or compromises the performance of such system or availability of data or uses it without
proper authorization.

Section 24. Cyber stalking.— (1) A person commits the offence of cyber stalking who, with the intent
to coerce or intimidate or harass any person, uses information system, information system network,
the Internet, website, electronic mail or any other similar means of communication to—

1Subs. and Ins. by Act No. XXXVII of 2023, ss.3-4

(a) follow a person or contacts or attempts to contact such person to foster personal
interaction repeatedly despite a clear indication of disinterest by such person;
(b) monitor the use by a person of the internet, electronic mail, text message or any
other form of electronic communication;
(c) watch or spy upon a person in a manner that results in fear of violence or serious
alarm or distress, in the mind of such person; or
(d) take a photograph or make a video of any person and displays or distributes it
without his consent in a manner that harms a person.
(2) Whoever commits the offence specified in sub-section (1) shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to one million
rupees or with both:
Provided that if victim of the cyber stalking under sub-section (1) is a minor the punishment
may extend to five years or with fine which may extend to ten million rupees or with both.
(3) Any aggrieved person or h is guardian, where such person is a minor, may apply to the
Authority for removal, destruction of or blocking access to such information referred to in sub-section
(1) and the Authority, on receipt of such application, shall forthwith pass such orders as d eemed
reasonable in the circumstances including an order for removal, destruction, preventing transmission
of or blocking access to such information and the Authority may also direct any of its licensees to
secure such information including traffic data.

Section 24A. Cyberbullying.— (1) A person commits the offence of cyberbullying who, with intent
to harass, threaten or target another person posts or sends electronic messages, including p ictures or
videos by using any social media platform, including chat rooms, blogs or instant messaging.
(2) A minor through his guardian may apply t o the Authority for removal, destruction of, or
blocking access to such content or communication referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) The Authority, on receipt of application under sub-section (2), sha ll forthwith pass such
orders as deemed appropriate in the circumstances including an order for removal, destruction,
preventing transmission of or blocking access to such content and communication.
(4) The Authority shall, before pass ing an order under sub -section (3), seek repo rt from
investigation agency whether or not such content is required for investigation or prosecution purposes.
(5) Whoever commits the offence of child cyberbullying as described in sub -section (1), shall
be punished with impriso nment of either description for a ter m which may extend to five years but
shall not be less than one year with a fine of up to five hundred thousand rupees and shall not less than
one hundred thousand rupees.]

Section 25. Spamming.— (1) A person commits the offence of spamming, who with intent transmits
harmful, fraudulent, misleading, illegal or unsolicited information to any person without permission of
the recipient or who causes any information system to show any such information for wrongful gain.

1Ins. by Act No. XXXVII of 2023, s.5.

(2) A person including an institution or an organization engaged in direct marketing shall
provide the option to the recipient of direct marketing to unsubscribe from such marketing.
(3) Whoever commits the offence of spamming as described in sub-section (1) by transmitting
harmful, fraudulent, misleading or illegal information, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three months or with fine of rupees fifty thousand which may extend upto rupees
five million or with both.

(4) Whoever commits the offence of spamming as described in sub-section (1) by transmitting
unsolicited information, or engages in direct marketing in violation of sub-section (2), for the first time,
shall be punished with fine not exceeding fifty thousand r upees, and for every subsequent violation
shall be punished with fine not less than fifty thousand rupees that may extend up to one million rupees.

Section 26. Spoofing.—(1) Whoever with dishonest intention establishes a website or sends any
information with a counterfeit source intended to be believed by the recipient or visitor of the website,
to be an authentic source commits spoofing.

(2) Whoever commits spoofing shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years or with fine which may extend to five hundred thousand rupees or with both.
1[26A, Punishment for false and fake information .—Whoever intentionally disseminates,
publicly exhibits, or transmits any information through any information system,, that he knows or has
reason to believe to be false or fake and likely to cause or create a sense of fear, panic or disorder or
unrest in general public or society shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend upto three
years or with fine which may extend to two million rupees or with both.]

Section 27. Legal recognition of offences committed in relation to information system. —(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an offence under this Act
or any other law shall not be denied legal recognition and enforcement for the sole reason of such offence
being committed in relation to or through the use of an information system.
(2) References to "property" in any law creating an offence in relation to or concerning property,
shall include information system and data.

Section 28. Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860) to apply.— The provisions of the Pakistan
Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860), to the extent not inconsistent with anything provided in this Act,
shall apply to the offences provided in this Act.
CHAPTER III
ESTABLISHMENT OF INVESTIGATION AGENCY AND PROCEDURAL POWERS FOR
INVESTIGATION

Section 29. Investigation agency.— (1) The Federal Government shall establish an investigation
agency to be called the National Cyber Crime Investigation Agency (NCCIA) for inquiry into,
investigation and prosecution of the offences specified under this Act.
(2) The NCCIA shall be headed by a Director General, who shall have the power to employ
any other officers, prosecutors and staff as may be prescribed.

1Ins. and subs. by Act No. II of 2025, s.5-6.

(3) The Federal Government shall appoint the Director General of the NCCIA for a non -
extendable term of three years, and the administration and control of the NCCIA shall vest in the
Director General who shall exercise in respect of the NCCIA the powers of Inspector General of Police
under the Police Order, 2002 (Chief Executive's Order No. 22 of 2002).
(4) For the purposes of inquiry and investigation, the officers of the NCCIA shall be deemed
to be the police officer of equivalent rank as required under the Code. The officers of the NCCIA shall
have the same powers and functions and related authority for the performance of investigating
functions as are conferred on a police officer of the equivalent rank under the Code.
(5) After establishment of the NCCIA, the Cyber Crime Wing of the Federal Investigation
Agency shall cease to exist and all personnel, cases, inquiries, investigations, assets, properties, budget,
liabilities, rights, obligations, privileges and matters related thereto or connected therewith in respect
of the defunct Cyber Crime Wing of the Federal Investigation Agency shall stand transferred to the
NCCIA.
(6) Unless otherwise provided for under this Act, the investigat ion agency and the authorized
officer shall in all matters follow the procedure laid down in the Code to the extent that it is not
inconsistent with any provision of this Act.
(7) The investigation agency shall establish its own capacity for forensic analysis of the data or
in information systems and the forensic analysis reports generated by the investigation agency shall
not be inadmissible in evidence before any court for the sole reason that such reports were generated
by the investigation agency.
(8) Notwithstanding provisions of any other law, the Federal Government shall make rules for
appointment, promotion, transfer in the investigation agency including undertaking of specialized
courses in digital forensics, information technology, computer science and other related matters for
training of officers and staff of the investigation agency:
Provided that until such time, rules are made by the Federal Government, service matters of
officers and staff of the NCCIA shall be regulated under the Civil Servants Act, 1973 (LXXI of 1973)
and rules made thereunder.
(9) Without prejudice to anything contained in this section, the rules, orders or any instruments
made and issued under this Act prior to commencement of the Prevention of Electronic Crimes
(Amendment) Act, 2025 ( of 2025) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the NCCIA with necessary
modifications.]

Section 30. Power to investigate.— Only an authorized officer of the investigation agency shall have
the powers to investigate an offence under this Act:
Provided that the Federal Government may constitute one or more jo int investigation teams
comprising an authorized officer of NCCIA and any other law enforcement agency for investigation
of offences under this Act. The joint investigation team may seek assistance from any intelligence
agency for the purposes of investigation under this Act.]

1Subs. by Act No. II of 2025, s.7.

Section 30A. Remand.— (1) Where a person is detained for investigation, the investigating officer,
within twenty-four hours of the arrest, excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of
arrest to the Court, shall produce the accused before the Court, and may apply for remand of the
accused to police custody, or custody of any other investigating agency joined in the investigation for
which the maximum period allowed must not be more than fourteen days at one time:
Provided that, where an accused cannot within twentyfour hours be produced before the Court,
a temporary order for police custody or custody of any other investigating agency joined in the
investigation not exceeding twenty-four hours may be obtained from the nearest Magist rate for the
purpose of producing the accused before the Court within that period.
(2) No extension in time of the remand of the accused in police custody or custody of any other
investigating agency joined in the investigation shall be allowed, unless it can be shown by the
investigating officer, to the satisfaction of the Court that further evidence may be available and the
Court is satisfied that no bodily harm has been or will be caused to the accused:
Provided that the total period of such remand shall not in any case exceed thirty days.
(3) The Court shall be deemed to be a Magistrate for purposes of sub-section (2).

Section 30B. Victim and witness protection.— (l) A victim and witness protection system shall be
established by the Federal and Provincial Governments of Pakistan through rules with features
including the following, namely:—
(i) special security arrangements for witnesses and victims;
(ii) concealment of identity;
(iii) distance recording of testimonies through video-conferencing, audio-video links
and by the use of modern devices;
(iv) re-location of victims and witnesses;
(v) provision of reasonable financial assistance;
(vi) compensation to legal heirs of protected victims and witnesses;
(vii) safe-houses, dar-ul-amans etc.; and
(viii) such other measures as may be necessary and ancillary.
(2) Till such time the rules envisaged in sub-section (1) are prescribed, the witness p rotection
system and benefits prescribed under the Witness Protection, Security and Benefit Act, 201 7 (XXI of
2017) shall be applicable to both victims and witnesses under this Act, mutatis mutandis.

Section 30C. In-camera trial.— (1) The trial of offences against minors shall be conducted in-camera:
Provided that the Court, if it thinks fit, on its own or on an application made by either of parties,
allow any particular person to have access to Court proceedings, or be or remain in the Court.

1Ins. by Act No. XXXVII of 2023, s.7.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, where any
proceedings are held under sub -section (1), the Court may adopt appropriate measures, including
holding of the trial through video -link or usage of screens, for the protection of the victims and the
witnesses.
(3) Where any proceedings are held under sub-section (1), it shall not be lawful for any person
to publish or broadcast any matter or information in relation to any such proceedings, except with the
permission of the Court.

Section 30D. Investigation into the child sexual content referred to Pakistan Telecommunication
Authority.— The 1[Investigation Agency ] shall acquire the information of the child sexual abuse
content referred for blocking and removal to 1[Authority] and the organizations having data in this
regard, for investigation prior to their removal and blocking by said Authority, whether the d irect
complaint against the said material has been made or not.]

Section 31. Expedited preservation and acquisition of data.— (1) If an authorised officer is satisfied
that—
(a) specific data stored in any information system or by means of an information
system is reasonably required for the purposes of a criminal investigation; and
(b) there is a risk or vulnerability that the data may be modified, lost, destroyed or
rendered inaccessible,
the authorized officer may, by written notice given to the person in control of the information
system, require that person to provide that data or to ensure that the data specified in the notice be
preserved and the integrity thereof is maintained for a period not exceeding ninety days as specified in
the notice:
Provided that the authorized officer shall immediately but not later than twenty-four hours bring
to the notice of the Court, the fact of acquisition of such data and the Court on receipt of such
information may pass such orders as deemed appropriate in the circums tances of the case including
issuance of warrants for retention of such data or otherwise.
(2) The period provided in sub-section (1) for preservation of data may be extended by the
Court if so deemed necessary upon receipt of an application from the authorized officer in this behalf.

Section 32. Retention of traffic data. — (1) A service provider shall, within its existing or required
technical capability, retain its specified traffic data for a minimum period of one year or such period
as the Authority may notify from time to time and, subject to production of a warrant issued by the
Court, provide that data to the investigation agency or the authorized officer whenever so required.
(2) The service providers shall retain the traffic data under sub-section (1) by fulfilling all the
requirements of data retention and its originality as provided under sections 5 and 6 of the Electronic
Transactions Ordinance, 2002 (LI of 2002).
(3) Any owner of the information system who is not a licensee of the Authority and violates
sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence punishable, if committed for the first time, with fine which

1Subs. by Act No. II of 2025, s.8.

may extend to ten million rupees and upon any subsequent conviction shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine or with both:
Provided that where the violation is committed by a licensee of the Authority, the same shall
be deemed to be a violation of the terms and conditions of the licensee and shall be treated as such
under the Pakistan Telecommunication (Re-organization) Act, 1996 (XVII of 1996).

Section 33. Warrant for search or seizure. — (1) Upon an application by an authorized officer that
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Court that there exist reasonable ground s to believe that there
may be in a specified place an information system, data, device or other articles that—
(a) may reasonably be required for the purpose of a criminal investigation or
criminal proceedings which may be material as evidence in proving a
specifically identified offence made out under this Act; or
(b) has been acquired by a person as a result of the commission of an offence, the
Court may issue a warrant which shall authorize an officer of the investigation
agency, with such assistance as may be necessary, to enter the specified place
and to search the premises and any information system, data, device or storage
medium relevant to the offence identified in the application and access, seize or
similarly secure any information system, data , device or other articles relevant
to the offence identified in the application.
(2) In circumstances involving an offence under section 10, under which a warrant may be
issued but cannot be obtained without the apprehension of destruction, alteration or loss of data,
information system, data, device or other articles required for investigation, the authorized officer, who
shall be a Gazetted officer of the investigation agency, may enter the specified place and search the
premises and any information system, data, device or other articles relevant to the offence and access,
seize or similarly secure any information system, data, device or other articles relevant to the offence:
Provided that the authorized officer shall immediately but not later than twenty-four hours bring
to the notice of the Court, the fact of such search or seizure and the Court on receipt of such information
may pass such orders as deemed appropriate in the circumstances of the case.

Section 34. Warrant for disclosure of content data. — (1) Up on an application by an authorised
officer that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Court that there exist reasonable grounds to believe
that the content data stored in an information system is reasonably required for the purpose of a
criminal investigation or criminal proceedings with respect to an offence made out under this Act, the
Court may, after recording reasons, order that the person in control of the data or information system,
to provide such data or access to such data to the authorized officer.
(2) The period of a warrant issued under sub-section (1) may be extended beyond seven days
if, on an application, a Court authorizes an extension for a further period of time as may be specified
by the Court.

Section 35. Powers of an authorized officer. — (1) Subject to provisions of this Act, an authorized
officer shall have the powers to—
(a) have access to and inspect the operation of any specified information system;
(b) use or cause to be used any specified information system to search any specified
data contained in or available to such system;

(c) obtain and copy only relevant data, use equipment to make copies and obtain an
intelligible output from an information system;
(d) have access to or demand any information in readable and comprehensible
format or plain version;
(e) require any person by whom or on whose behalf, the authorized officer has
reasonable cause to believe, any information system has been used to grant
access to any data within an information system within the control of such
person;
(f) require any person having charge of or otherwise concerned with the operation
of any information system to provide him reasonable technical and other
assistance as the authorized officer may require for investigation of an offence
under this Act; and
(g) require any person who is in possession of decryption information of an
information system, device or data under investigation to grant him access to
such data, device or information system in unencrypted or decrypted intelligible
format for the purpose of investigating any such offence:
Explanation.—Decryption information means information or
technology that enables a person to readily retransform or unscramble encrypted
data from its unreadable form and from ciphered data to intelligible data.
(2) In exercise of the power of search and seizure of any information system, program or data
the authorized officer at all times shall,—
(a) act with proportionality;
(b) take all precautions to maintain integrity and secrecy of the information system
and data in respect of which a warrant for search or seizure has been issued;
(c) not disrupt or interfere with the integrity or running and operation of any
information system or data that is not the subject of the offences identified in
the application for which a warrant for search or seizure has been issued;
(d) avoid disruption to the continued legitimate business operations and the
premises subjected to search or seizure under this Act; and
(e) avoid disruption to any information system, program or data not connected with
the information system that is not the subject of the offences identified in the
application for which a warrant has been issued or is not necessary for the
investigation of the specified offence in respect of wh ich a warrant has been
issued.
(3) When seizing or securing any data or information system, the authorized officer shall make
all efforts to use technical measures to maintain its integrity and chain of custody. The authorized
officer shall seize an infor mation system, data, device or articles, in part or in whole, as a last resort
only in the event where it is not possible under the circumstances to use such technical measures or
where use of such technical measures by themselves shall not be sufficient t o maintain the integrity
and chain of custody of the data or information system being seized.

(4) Where an authorized officer seizes or secures any data or information system, the
authorized officer shall ensure that data or information system while in the possession or in the access
of the authorized officer is not released to any other person including competitors or public at large
and details including log of any action performed on the information system or data is maintained in a
manner prescribed under this Act.

Section 36. Dealing with seized data or information system.— (1) If any data or information system
has been seized or secured following a search or seizure under this Act, the authorized officer who
undertook the search or seizure shall, at the time of the seizure,—
(a) make a list of what has been seized or rendered inaccessible, with the date and
time of seizure; and
(b) give a copy of that list to,—
(i) the occupier of the premises; or
(ii) the owner of the data or information system; or
(iii) the person from whose possession the data or information system has
been seized, in a prescribed manner in the presence of two witnesses.
(2) The authorized officer, upon an application of the owner of the data or information system
or an authorized agent of the owner and on payment of prescribed costs, shall provide forensic image
of the data or information system to the owner or his authorized agent within a time prescribed under
this Act.
(3) If the authorized officer has reasons to believe that providing forensic image of the data or
information system to the owner under sub-section (2) may prejudice,—
(a) the investigation in connection with which the search was carried out; or
(b) another ongoing investigation; or
(c) any criminal proceedings that are pending or that may be brought in relation to
any of those investigations, the authorized officer shall, within seven days of
receipt of the application under sub-section (2), approach the Court for seeking
an order not to provide copy of the seized data or information system.
(4) The Court, upon receipt of an application from an authorized officer under sub-section (3),
may after recording reasons in writing pass such order as deemed approp riate in the circumstances of
the case.
(5) The costs associated with the exercise of rights under this section shall be borne by the
person exercising these rights.

Section 37. Unlawful on-line content.— (1) The Authority shall have the power to remove or block
or issue directions for removal or blocking of access to an information through any information system
if it considers it necessary in the interest of the glory of Islam or the integrity, security or defence of
Pakistan or any part thereof, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court or
commission of or incitement to an offence under this Act.

(2) The Authority shall, with the approval of the Federal Government, prescribe rules
providing for, among other matters, safeguards, transparent process and effective oversight mechanism
for exercise of powers under sub-section (1).
(3) Until such rules are prescribed under sub-section (2), the Authority shall exercise its powers
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force in accordance with the directions issued by
the Federal Government not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
(4) Any person aggrieved from any order passed by the Authority under sub-section (1), may
file an application with the Authority for review of the order within thirty days from the date of passing
of the order.
(5) An appeal against the decision of the Authority in review shall lie before the 1[Tribunal]
within thirty days of the order of the Authority in review.

Section 38. Limitation of liability of service providers.— (1) No service provider shall be subject to
any civil or criminal liability, unless it is established that the service provider had specific ac tual
knowledge and willful intent to proactively and positively participate, and not merely through omission
or failure to act, and thereby facilitated, aided or abetted the use by any person of any information
system, service, application, online platform or telecommunication system maintained, controlled or
managed by the service provider in connection with a contravention of this Act or rules made
thereunder or any other law for the time being in force:
Provided that the burden to prove that a service pr ovider had specific actual knowledge, and
willful intent to proactively and positively participate in any act that gave rise to any civil or criminal
liability shall be upon the person alleging such facts and no interim or final orders, or directions shall
be issued with respect to a service provider by any investigation agency or Court unless such facts have
so been proved and determined:
Provided further that such allegation and its proof shall clearly identify with specificity the
content, material or other aspect with respect to which civil or criminal liability is claimed including
but not limited to unique identifiers such as the Account Identification (Account ID), Uniform
Resource Locator (URL), Top Level Domain (TLD), Internet Protocol Addresses (IP Addresses), or
other unique identifier and clearly state the statutory provision and basis of the claim.
(2) No service provider shall under any circumstance be liable under this Act, rules made
thereunder or any other law for maintaining and making available the provision of their service in good
faith.
(3) No service provider shall be subject to any civil or criminal liability as a result of informing
a subscriber, user or end-users affected by any claim, notice or exercise of any power under this Act,
rules made thereunder or any other law:
Provided that the service provider, for a period not exceeding fourteen days, shall keep
confidential and not disclose the existence of any investigation or exercise of any power under this Act
when a notice to this effect is served upon it by an authorized officer, which period of confidentiality
may be extended beyond fourteen days if, on an application by the authorized officer, the Court
authorizes an extension for a further specified period upon being satisfied that reasonable cause for
such extension exists.

1Subs. by the Establishment of Telecommunication Appellate Tribunal Act, 2024 (Act No. XXV of 2024), s. 7.

(4) No service provider shall be liable under this Act, rules made thereunder or any other law
for the disclosure of any data or other information that the service provider discloses only to the extent
of the provisions of this Act.
(5) No service provider shall be under any obligation to proactively monitor, make inquiries
about material or conten t hosted, cached, routed, relayed, conduit, transmitted or made available by
such intermediary or service provider.

Section 39. Real-time collection and recording of information. — (1) If a Court is satisfied on the
basis of information furnished by an authorized o fficer that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that the content of any information is reasonably required for the purposes of a specific criminal
investigation, the Court may order, with respect to information held by or passing through a service
provider, to a designated agency as notified under the Investigation for Fair Trial Act, 2013 (I of 2013)
or any other law for the time being in force having capability to collect real time information, to collect
or record such information in real-time in coo rdination with the investigation agency for provision in
the prescribed manner:
Provided that such real-time collection or recording shall not be ordered for a period beyond
what is absolutely necessary and in any event for not more than seven days.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law to the contrary the information so collected
under sub-section (1) shall be admissible in evidence.
(3) The period of real-time collection or recording may be extended beyond seven days if, on
an application, the Court authorizes an extension for a further specified period.
(4) The Court may also require the designated agency to keep confidential the fact of the
execution of any power provided for in this section and any information relating to it.
(5) The application under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall in addition to substantive grounds and
reasons also,—
(a) explain why it is believed that the data sought will be available with the person
in control of an information system;
(b) identify and explain with specificity the type of information likely to be found
on such information system;
(c) identify and explain with specificity the identified offence made out under this
Act in respect of which the warrant is sought;
(d) if authority to seek real-time collection or recording on more than one occasion is
needed, explain why and how many further disclosures are needed to achieve the
purpose for which the warrant is to be issued;
(e) specify what measures shall be taken to prepare and ensure that the real-time
collection or recording is carried out whilst maintaining the privacy of other users,
customers and third parties and without the disclosure of information of any person
not part of the investigation;
(f) explain why the investigation may be frustrated or seriously prejudiced unless the
real time collection or recording is permitted; and

(g) why, to achieve the purpose for which the warrant is being applied, real time
collection or recording by the person in control of the information system is
necessary.

Section 40. Forensic laboratory.—The Federal Government shall establish or designate a forensic
laboratory, independent of the investigation agency, to provide expert opinion before the Court or for
the benefit of the investigation agency in relation to electronic evidence collected for purposes of
investigation and prosecution of offences under this Act.

Section 41. Confidentiality of information.—Notwithstanding immunity granted under any other law
for the time being in force, any person including a service provider while providing services under the
terms of lawful contract or otherwise in accordance with the law, or an authorized officer who has
secured access to any material or data containing personal information about another person, discloses
such material to any other person, except when required by law, without the consent of the person
concerned or in breach of lawful contract with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to cause
harm, wrongful loss or gain to any person or compromise confidentiality of such material or data shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may
extend to one million rupees or with both:
Provided that the burden of proof of any defense taken by an accused service provider or an
authorized officer that he was acting in good faith, shall be on such a service provider or the authorized
officer, as the case may be.
CHAPTER IV
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

Section 42. International cooperation.— (1) The Federal Government may upon receipt of a request,
through the designated agency under this Act, extend such cooperation to any foreign government
1[including the government of Azad Jammu and Kashmir], 24 x 7 network, any foreign agency or any
international organization or agency for the purposes of investigations or proceedings concerning
offences related to information systems, electronic communication or data or for the collection of
evidence in electronic form relating to an offence or obtaining expeditious preservation and disclosure
of data by means of an information system or real- time collection of data associated with specified
communications or interception of data under this Act.
(2) The Federal Government may forward to a foreign government, 24x7 network, any foreign
agency or any international agency or organization any information obtained from its own
investigations if it considers that the disclosure of such information might assist the other government,
agency or organization etc., as the case be, in initiating or carrying out investigations or proceedings
concerning any offence under this Act.

(3) The Federal Government shall require the foreign government, 24 x 7 network, any foreign
agency or any international organization or agency to keep the information provided confidential and
use it strictly for the purposes it is provided.

(4) The Federal Government may, through the designated agency, send and answer requests
for mutual assistance the execution of such requests or their transmission to the authorities competent
for their execution.

1Ins. by Act No. XXXVII of 2023, s.8.

(5) The Federal Government may refuse to accede to any request made by a foreign
government, 24 x 7 network, any foreign agency or any international organization or agency, if,—
(a) it is of the opinion that the request, if granted, would prejudice sovereignty,
security, public order or other essential public interest of Pakistan;
(b) the offence is regarded by the Federal Government as being of a political nature;
(c) there are substantial grounds for believing that the request for assistance has
been made for the purpose of prosecuting a person on account of that person's
race, sex, religion, nationality, ethnic origin or political opinions or that that
person's position may be prejudiced for any of those reasons;
(d) the request relates to an offence the prosecution of which in the requesting State
may be incompatible with the laws of Pakistan;
(e) the assistance requested requires the Federal Government to carry out
compulsory measures that may be inconsistent with the laws or practices of
Pakistan had the offence been the subject of investigation or prosecution under
its own jurisdiction; or
(f) the request concerns an offence which may prejudice an ongoing investigation
or trial or rights of its citizens guaranteed under the Constitution.
(g) Where the Federal Government decides to provide the requested cooperation,
the relevant requirements and safeguards provided under this Act and rules
framed thereunder shall be followed.
(7) The designated agency shall maintain a register of requests received from any foreign
government, 24 x 7 network, any foreign agency or any international organization or agency under this
Act and action taken thereon.
CHAPTER-V
PROSECUTION AND TRIAL OF OFFENCES

Section 43. Offences to be compoundable and non-cognizable.— (1) All offences under this Act, except
the offences under sections 1[10, 13, 14, 20, 21, 22 and 26A] and abetment thereof, shall be non-cognizable,
bailable and compoundable:
Provided that offences under section 17 shall be cognizable by the investigation agency on a written
complaint by the Authority.
(2) Offences under sections 10, 21 1[13, 14, 20, 22, 22A, 22B, 22C and 26A] and abetment thereof
shall be non-bailable, non-compoundable and cognizable by the investigation agency.

Section 43A. Complaint against cybercrimes against children.— Complaint against the offences under
sections 10, 21, 21A, 21B, 21C, 21D, 21E, 2lF 1[26A] and abatement thereof may be lodged with
1[investigation agency] by the complainant as defined under clause (viia) of section 2.]

1Subs., and Ins. by Act No. II of 2025, s.9-10.
2Ins. by Act No. XXXVII of 2023, s.10.

Section 44. Cognizance and trial of offences. — (1) The Federal Government, in consultation with the
Chief Justice of respective High Court, shall designate presiding officers of the Courts to try offences under
this Act at such places as deemed necessary.
(2) The Federal Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice of respective High Court,
arrange for special training of the presiding officers of the Court to be conducted by an entity notified by
the Federal Government for training on computer sciences, cyber forensics, electronic transactions and data
protection.
(3) Prosecution and trial of an offence under this Act committed by a minor shall be conducted
under the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000 (XXII of 2000).
(4) To the extent not inconsistent with this Act, the procedure laid down under the Code and the
Qanoon-e-Shahadat, 1984 (P.O.No.X of 1984), shall be followed.

Section 45. Order for payment of compensation. — (1) The Court may, in addition to award of any
punishment including fine under this Act, make an order for payment of compensation to the victim for
any damage or loss caused and the compensation so awarded shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue:
Provided that the compensation awarded by the Court shall not prejudice any right to a civil remedy
for the recovery of damages beyond the amount of compensation so awarded.

Section 45A. Support mechanism for the victims.— The Government shall develop mechanism for the
support of victims in collaboration with other agencies and civil society organizations.]

Section 46. Appointment of amicus curiae and seeking expert opinion.—The Court may appoint amicus
curiae or seek independent expert opinion on any matter connected with a case pending before it.

Section 47. Appeal.— An appeal against the final judgment or order of a Court shall , within thirty days
from the date of provision of its certified copy free of cost, lie—
(a) to the High Court concerned against such judgment or order if passed by a
court of sessions; or
(b) to the court of sessions concerned against such judgment or order if passed by a
magistrate.
CHAPTER VI
PREVENTIVE MEASURES

Section 48. Prevention of electronic crimes.— (1) The Federal Government or the Authority, as the
case may be, may issue directives to be followed by the owners of the designated information systems
or service providers in the interest of preventing any offence under this Act.
(2) Any owner of the information system who is not a licensee of the Authority and violates
the directives issued under sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence punishable, if committed for
the first time, with fine which may extend to ten million rupees and up on any subsequent conviction
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine or with both:
Provided that where the violation is committed by a licensee of the Authority, the same shall
be deemed to be a violation of the te rms and conditions of the licensee and shall be treated as such
under the Pakistan Telecommunication (Re-organization) Act, 1996.
1Ins. by Act No. XXXVII of 2023, s.11.

Section 49. Computer emergency response teams.—(1) The Federal Government may constitute one
or more computer emergency response teams to respond to any threat against or attack on any critical
infrastructure information systems or critical infrastructure data, or widespread attack on information
systems in Pakistan.
(2) A computer emergency response team constituted under sub-section (1) may comprise of
technical experts of known expertise officers of any intelligence or agency or any sub-set thereof.
(3) A computer emergency response team shall respond to a threat or attack witho ut causing
any undue hindrance or inconvenience to the use and access of the information system or data as may
be prescribed.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS

Section 50. Relation of the Act with other laws.—(1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect not
in derogation of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860), the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898 (Act V of 1898), the Qanoon-e-Shahadat, 1984 (P.O. No. X of 1984), the Protection of Pakistan
Act, 2014 (X of 2014) and the Investigation for Fair Trial Act, 2013 (I of 2013).
(2) Subject to sub-section (1), the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in any other law on the subject for the time being in force.

Section 50A. Transitory.— Till the establishment of the Authority and NCCIA, the Pakistan
Telecommunication Authority and the Investigation Agency existing prior to commencement of the
Prevention of Electronic Crimes (Amendment) Act, 2025 ( of 2025) shall continue to perform their
functions accordingly.]

Section 51. Power to make rules.— (1) The Federal Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may specify,—
(a) qualifications and trainings of the officers and staff of the investigation agency
and prosecutors;
(b) powers, functions and responsibilities of the investigation agency, its officers
and prosecutors;
(c) standard , operating procedures of the investigation agency;
(d) mode and manner in which record of investigation under this Act may be
maintained;
(e) manner to deal with the seized data, information system, device or other articles;
(f) working of joint investigation teams;
(g) requirements for seeking permission of the Authority to change, alter or
re-programme unique device identifier of any communication equipment by any
person for research or any other legitimate purpose;

1Ins. by Act No. II of 2025, s.11.

1[(h) procedure for seeking appropriate order of the Authority for removal, or
blocking of online content;]
(i) constitution of computer emergency response team and the standard operating
procedure to be adopted by such team;

(j) appointment of designated age ncy having capability to collect real time
information;

(k) manner of coordination between the investigation agency and other law
enforcement and intelligence agencies including designated agency;

(l) for management and oversight of the forensic laboratory;

(m) qualifications and trainings of the officers, experts and staff of the forensic
laboratory;

(n) powers, functions and responsibilities of the forensic laboratory, its officers,
experts and staff;

(o) standard operating procedures of the fo rensic laboratory to interact with the
investigation agency;

(p) manner of soliciting and extending international cooperation; 1[*]

(q) matters connected or ancillary thereto 1[; and]
1[(q) provision of fines for contravention of the provisions of this Act and rules made
thereunder.]

Section 51A. Power to make regulations .— The Authority may, by notification in the official
Gazette, make regulations for carrying out the purposes of this Act._]

Section 52. Removal of difficulties.—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Federal Government may, within two years of the commencement of this Act and by order
published in the official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act
as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty.

Section 53. Report to Parliament.—The agency designated or established under section 29 of the Act
shall submit a half yearly report to both houses of the Parliament for consideration by the relevant
Committee in camera, in respect of its activities, without disclosing identity information, in a manner
as prescribed under this Act.

Section 54. Amendment of Electronic Transactions Ordinance, 2002 (LI of 2002) and pending
proceedings.—(1) Sections 36 a nd 37 of the Electronic Transactions Ordinance, 2002 (LI of 2002)
are omitted.
(2) Any action taken by or with the approval of the Authority or proceedings pending under
the provisions of the Electronic Transactions Ordinance, 2002 (LI of 2002) repealed by sub-section
1Subs., Omitted, added and ins. by Act No. II of 2025, ss.12-13.

(1), shall continue and be deemed to have been taken or initiated under this Act.

Section 55. Savings of powers. — 1[(1)] Nothing in this Act shall affect, limit or prejudice the duly
authorized and lawful powers and functions of the institutions controlled by the Governments exercised
and performed in good faith.
1[(2) Any rules, regulations, orders, directions or instructions duly made or issued under this
Act prior to commencement of the Prevention of Electronic Crimes (Amendment) Act, 2025 ( of 2025)
by an authority competent to make them and in force immediately before the said commencement
shall, in so far as such rules, regulations, orders, directions or instructions are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act or rules, regulations, orders, directions or instructions made or issued thereunder,
be deemed to be rules, regulations, orders, directions or instructions made under this Act.
(3) Notwithstanding the provision of sub -section (2) any such rules, regulations, orders,
directions or instructions existing prior to commencement of the Prevention of Electronic Crimes.
(Amendment) Act, 2025 ( of 2025) or the rules, regulations, orders, directions or instructions made
or issued thereunder in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act shall, to the extent
of such inconsistency, be void.]

——

1Numbered and added by Act No. II of 2025, s.14.
RGN: Dated 07-02-2025
