PUNJAB RENTED PREMISES ACT, 2009

Section 5: Agreement between landlord and tenant.
(1) A landlord shall not let out a premises to a tenant except by a tenancy agreement in writing.
(2) A landlord shall present the tenancy agreement before the Rent Registrar for registration within thirty days of the signing of the agreement.
(3) An agreement which is not registered with the Rent Registrar shall not be admissible in evidence before the Rent Tribunal or any other court of law in support of any claim.

Section 15: Eviction of tenant.
A landlord may apply to the Rent Tribunal for eviction of a tenant on any of the following grounds:
(a) the tenant has failed to pay rent within fifteen days after the expiry of the period specified in the tenancy agreement, or in the absence of such agreement, within thirty days of it becoming due;
(b) the tenant has committed breach of a condition of the tenancy agreement;
(c) the tenant has used the premises for a purpose other than that for which it was let out;
(d) the tenant has sub-let the premises without the written consent of the landlord;
(e) the tenant has committed acts which have impaired the value or utility of the premises; or
(f) the landlord requires the premises in good faith for his personal use or for the use of any of his children or spouse.

Section 17: Disconnection of utilities.
A landlord shall not, without just or sufficient cause, cut off or withhold any of the utilities (electricity, water, gas, or sewerage) of the rented premises. If a landlord violates this provision, the tenant may file an application before the Rent Tribunal, which shall order the landlord to restore the utilities immediately and may award compensation/damages to the tenant for any loss suffered.

Section 20: Rent Tribunal.
All disputes between landlords and tenants in Punjab are heard and resolved by the Rent Tribunal, headed by a Rent Controller. Tenancy disputes cannot be directly filed in civil courts. The Rent Tribunal is mandated to resolve cases expeditiously.
